# Reserch

Debates in AI research can be expected to exert an important influence on the formation of public discourse about AI. In the last years, knowledge claims about the unprecedented, revolutionary, capacities of machine learning systems to detect patterns in data at scale have been invoked as a key driver of change across science, policy and media debates. Many of the AI controversies that have occurred across these spheres centre on the impact of science and innovation – from facial recognition to autonomous vehicles - on society. But what about controversies within and about AI research itself? What concerns have recent developments in AI raised among research communities in the UK, Germany, France and Canada? Are the issues identified by computer scientists the same or different to those raised by social science and humanities scholars? And to what extent do wider communities of expertise – policy-makers, legal experts, ethicists, activists and citizens concerned with AI - engage with AI knowledge claims?

The UK team for Shaping AI will map controversies in and about AI research across the sciences, humanities and extended peer communities (Funtowicz and Ravetz, 1993). Combining digital methods of issue mapping (social media & Web analysis, scientometrics) with ethnographic engagement with AI research, we will use network and textual analysis to identify actors, objects and concerns animating controversies in AI research in the relevant period (Marres, 2015). In doing so, our aim is to develop a contextual understanding of the knowledge propositions that organise – and/or fail to organise - controversies in and about AI research across different fields of expertise, and to contribute to Shaping AI's wider investigation as to whether distinctive modes of problematization are detectable in AI controversies (Roberge & Castelle, 2021).

## Team UK

**Noortje Marres** is Professor in Science, Technology and Society (STS) in the Centre for Interdisciplinary Methodologies, University of Warwick and Principal Investigator on the Shaping AI project. She has been a key contributor to the development of controversy analysis as an interdisciplinary method, including through her ESRC-funded research on Issue Mapping as Participatory Method. Noortje has published two monographs, Material Participation (Palgrave, 2012) and Digital Sociology (Polity, 2017) and besides her work on Shaping AI, she is currently conducting research on real-world testing of intelligent vehicles as part of her Leverhulme Fellowship "Beyond the Lab" (2022-2023).

**Michael Castelle** is Assistant Professor in the Centre for Interdisciplinary Methodologies at the University of Warwick, and a Co-Investigator on the Shaping AI project. His research is at the intersection of the economic sociology of markets and platforms, the history of late 20th-century computing, and Science and Technology Studies. Michael has a multidisciplinary academic background in sociology, computer science, and computational neuroscience/neurology. He received his PhD from the Department of Sociology at the University of Chicago, for his doctoral thesis “Transaction and Message: From Database to Marketplace, 1970-2000.” At the University of Warwick, Michael is convenor of the MSc Big Data and Digital Futures, and he has recently published a number of articles and book chapters on the Sociology of Deep Learning.

**Beatrice Gobbo** is Assistant Professor in the Centre for Interdisciplinary Methodologies at the University of Warwick. She received her Ph.D. in Design from the Design Department of Politecnico di Milano where she was a member of the DensityDesign Lab. Her work and academic interests are positioned at the intersection between information design and computer science. Indeed, with her PhD thesis “Embalming and Dissecting AI. Visual Explanations for the General Public” she describes a mixed methodology for approaching the Explainable Artificial Intelligence issue from a communication design perspective. 

**James Tripp** is a Senior Research Software Engineer at the University of Warwick and Senior Technologist on the Shaping AI project. He has a PhD in Cognitive Science and supports both research and teaching at the Centre for Interdisciplinary Methodologies (CIM) through writing research software, managing and deploying Linux server infrastructure and both the design and delivery of technical workshops covering diverse computational methods.

**Chiara Poletti** is a Post-Doctoral Research Assistant at the Centre for Interdisciplinary Methodologies (CIM), University of Warwick and on the Shaping AI project. She received her PhD in Sociology from the University of Cardiff. Her doctoral research project applied methods of controversy mapping to study the governance of speech online and her current research explores the ways in which sociology and social research can inform the study of AI.